---
layout:     post
title:      Surprises
---

A little over a month ago my aunt passed away. I thought that, at twenty-five, I had experienced not everything, but small doses of most things a person will go through in life. Like having your first taste of sugar before your mom allows you to eat an entire chocolate sundae, I thought that maybe some of my adolescent hardships would prepare me for the setbacks of adulthood.

And for the most part, they did. Having my heart broken at 16 felt only slightly less painful than when it was shattered at 22. But Life hadn’t even come close to preparing me for this, and I found myself learning about new emotions that had no words to describe them. I didn’t know it then, but it would take almost three weeks for things to go from good to bad, to worse, and then for it to be over. Eighteen days, actually. At every turn, there were surprises and gifts that I didn’t expect.

When I first heard that she had been admitted to the hospital, it scared me. A lot. Every inch of me wanted to turn on my heels right back into that elevator and cry all the way back home. I am glad I didn’t do that, because the second I crossed the threshold into her room, my fight or flight response made a 180 and I went straight into smile-everything-is-okay mode. I adjusted her pillows, I made jokes, I fed her when she was too shaky to pick up the fork, I helped her to the bathroom, and then I smiled some more. When she slept, I watched TV while glancing over every few minutes to make sure she was still comfortable, or if I’m being totally honest, to make sure she was still breathing. The body’s way of going through the motions when my mind told me to run was the first surprise. The second was having two polarizing feelings inside of me. It was rewarding to be able to take care of someone who cared for me my entire life, but given the circumstances, well, it was hard. These conflicting feelings created a whirlwind in my heart and instead of trying to calm them, I let myself be swept away by them. Each time I left the hospital to get some sleep, it was exponentially harder to do it all over again. But each time I went back, against my mind’s better judgment, my body took over and all was fine. It surprised me every time.

A week and a half later, it was clear that she was declining, rapidly. Family members kept making suggestions on what changes should be made (diet, lifestyle, etc.) when she got out and was back at home. I didn’t want to be the one to say that I didn’t think she would make it out of this one, so I quietly nodded my head in agreement anytime someone brought it up. And who was to say that she wasn’t? Besides the fictional portrayal of medicine on Grey’s Anatomy and ailing the common cold, I have about as much medical knowledge as the next person, so it was entirely possible that they’d seen people come back from worse. I found solace in my naiveté even though deep down I knew what the outcome would be. When the doctor walked in and confirmed my worst fear, I was surprised all over again when I felt myself make a frown that felt foreign on my face. That day I learned that there are muscles in your face reserved for only certain kinds of heartbreak. I hadn’t realized it until that very moment, but I had been hoping for some kind of miracle. The hope had been brewing in me for so long that I thought it’d seep out of me like molasses and ruin my shoes. On one hand, I marveled at how our brains can still remain hopeful even when logic and evidence are stacked against us. On the other hand, I was angry at the colossal disappointment brought on by blind optimism. Everything after this moment is a bit of a blur.

The days before she would be relocated to a hospice facility, she was always surrounded by family and hospital staff. The morning before she was relocated, I had a very brief few minutes alone with her. My mom had told me that when patients are in the state that she was, the last thing to go is their hearing. I took this opportunity to lean over the bed railing and whisper into her ear the words that had been echoing in my head the past two weeks. I doubted whether or not she could actually hear me, but then in a very cinematic fashion, a single tear rolled down her cheek. Some may chalk it up to pure coincidence, and maybe it was, but to a desperate heart like mine at that moment, it was exactly the affirmation I needed. Whether the credit should go to a higher power or to thousands of years of evolution, I will always be immensely grateful for our body’s ability to still keep an open ear long after the rest of us has shut down. I sincerely hope she heard the constant sounds of love and laughter all around her in her final days.

The hospice facility she was moved to was nothing short of amazing. Every staff member we encountered did their job with a high level of attentiveness and compassion. Family was allowed to stay 24 hours a day and most of us did. I would only come home to shower and then head right back. Throughout this whole ordeal I had a few close friends who offered their sympathies and shoulders to cry on. While I appreciated their gestures, I learned that consoling words don’t heal nearly as much as sitting with people who are fighting the same war. So for those last four days at the hospice center, that’s what we did. Too sleep deprived and fatigued for words, we sat in a fog of gloom so thick it filled our lungs each time we inhaled. That’s not to say that there wasn’t laughter, because there was, but in-between the laughs, we sat.

She passed on a Wednesday and was buried on a Friday. By Monday, life went on. You know it’s going to sting when she takes her last breath and when you see the casket go down. But no one tells you it’s going to sting worse when life resumes without a hitch on Monday. I don’t know what I was expecting exactly, but it definitely wasn’t the ease at which the world just kept spinning. The most surprising thing about all of this is that I’ve been sitting with this sadness—if I can call it that, I really don’t have a word for it—for over a month now and I am still no where close to understanding it. It is like trying to give gravity shape and texture. Instead of feeling like a part of me is missing, for every happy moment or good day, there is now a weight attached to it knowing that I can’t share it with her.

She won’t go down in history books or have monuments erected in her name. But I will share this. She was more than just my dad’s sister—she had a big hand in helping raise me, a debt I couldn’t repay even if I lived to be a thousand. For twenty-five years of my life, she was an infinite source of joy, laughter, strength, encouragement, and unconditional love. She led by example when it came to perseverance, hard work, loyalty, generosity and compassion. She taught me how to drive and always had candy on her. She bought me housewarming gifts and toiletries the day before I went off to college and spared me any lectures when I came back home defeated. Instead she offered me warm meals, a bed to sleep on, and told me not to give up. She loved and was loved. She taught me so much throughout her life and didn’t stop even in her final days. I learned to still be surprised by life, and to say thank you for all the tiny miracles and gifts it provides.

I really miss her.
